---
layout: page
title: Resources
cover_image: ./assets/img/phytoplankton_bloom.jpg
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zkVr4Vv3XRM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Building and experimenting with your own DIYnamics rotating table is
fun and easy! Take a look at the following documents to get started.

## **Assembling the DIYnamics rotating table**

# [Parts list PDF]({{ site.url }}/assets/pdf/diynamics_table_parts_list.pdf)

This document lists all components necessary to build the table and
links to buy the parts online, mostly from Amazon.  In total they cost
only $39.15 ($67.13 with optional components; prices as of May 2017).

# [Instructions PDF]({{ site.url }}/assets/pdf/diynamics_table_assembly_instructions.pdf)

This document contains an illustrated, step-by-step guide on how the
DIY Rotating Tank and set up its LEGO Power Functions components. The
instructions also include an overview on how to operate the design and
general troubleshooting tips. A video version of the instructions can
be found below.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rvF6UAO8vPA" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## **Learning and teaching with the DIYnamics rotating table**

# [Teaching guide PDF]({{ site.url }}/assets/pdf/diynamics_teaching_guide.pdf)

This document provides an overview of several geophysical fluid
dynamics (GFD) experiments than can be performed using the DIY
Rotating Tank. The teaching guide includes background information
detailing GFD concepts. Demonstrational videos can be found on our
[YouTube channel](http://tinyurl.com/diynamicsvideos).

## **External Resources**

# [UCLA SPINLab](http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/)

The Simulated Planetary INteriors Laboratory at UCLA studies the fluid
dynamics of Earth and other planets, including magnetohydrodynamics.
They use actual physical experiments cutting edge tank and sensor
technologies.  They also have a great YouTube channel with many
enjoyable and [educational
videos](https://www.youtube.com/user/spinlabucla).  They also
regularly participate in numerous public outreach events (presentation
slides can be found
[here](http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Aurnou-TurntableRecipes-EYU2011.pdf)).

# [MIT "Weather in a Tank" project](http://weathertank.mit.edu/)

"Weather in a Tank" details how to conduct rotating fluid experiments
to teach into atmospheric and oceanic processes.  A video introduction
to the project can be found [here](https://youtu.be/uWdKVpQ94Ns).
Mostly intended for instructors at the upper-division undergraduate or
early graduate levels.

# [Marshall and Plumb textbook](http://marshallplumb.mit.edu/)

*Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Dynamics* by Marshall and Plumb teaches
the fundamentals of atmospheric and oceanic circulation, with rotating
fluid tank demonstrations integrated into every chapter.  The book's
website provides further information about how to conduct the
experiments and use them as teaching tools.  Mostly intended for
students and professors at the upper-division undergraduate or early
graduate levels.
