Title: UCLA Exploring Your Universe (EYU) 2017
Date: 2017-11-05
Category: events
Tags: outreach, public, baroclinic instability
Slug: eyu-2017
Authors: Spencer Hill
Summary: The DIYnamics team ran a booth at UCLA's massive public science fair "Exploring Your Universe," featuring demonstrations and kids building their own DIYnamics tables.

{% img {static}../images/eyu-2017/eyu2017_sean.jpg 600 Sean leading a demo %}

_Sean leading a demonstration using DIYnamics tables.  The farther
table has a special acryllic sidewall that enables us to fill the
whole table with water.  The nearer one uses a plastic planter tray
that costs a few dollars to achieve nearly the same thing._

On November 5, 2017, the DIYnamics team performed hands-on
demonstrations for hundreds of kids at the annual [Exploring Your
Universe](https://www.exploringyouruniverse.org/) (EYU) event at UCLA.
EYU is basically a massive science fair, with groups from nearly every
science department at UCLA, from astronomers to biochemists,
performing demonstrations to teach kids (and their parents!) about
their science.  Of course, DIYnamics had a booth where we had kids
build our tables, use them to learn about rotating fluids, and also
give more in-depth demonstrations using our larger, custom square
tank.  We had a blast showing off our equipment and teaching science
to hundreds of people in total over the course of the day.

{% img {static}../images/eyu-2017/eyu2017_norris.jpg 600 Norris helping kids build their own tables %}

 _Norris helping out as several kids (and an adult!) build their own
motors for the DIYnamics table.  His table was swamped all day; kids
really loved building these!  Who doesn't love building with LEGOs?_

One highlight of the day was our newest activity, wherein kids got to
create the DIYnamics rotating tank kit themselves!  We provided all of
the needed LEGO parts, along with printouts of our official
instructions of how to assemble the motor.  Dozens of kids went
step-by-step through the instructions, creating the finished product
in just a few minutes every time.  We provided a little guidance here
and there, but mostly they were able to do it all on their own!

Whenever somebody finished building their motor, we would then use it
to drive a table in a science demonstration.  The kids loved to hear
us announce their name and to see their creation used to perform a
real-world science experiment.  Overall, this affirmed our belief that
our kit really is easy to build and use, and that the DIY aspect of
the apparatus adds to the connection students make with the science --
if we can learn about something using LEGOs and food coloring, how
hard can it really be?

{% img {static}../images/eyu-2017/eyu2017_juan.jpg 600 Juan leading a demonstration at EYU %}

_Juan demonstrating baroclinic instability using our large square
tank, along with a GoPro in the rotating frame that streams footage to
his iPad.  Look at all those excited faces!_

Another highlight was demonstrating baroclinic instability in our
larger square tank.  By putting a bucket of ice in the center, we
created baroclinic eddies and added some "Hollywood magic" via a GoPro
mounted in the rotating frame.  The rotating frame footage was
streamed directly to an iPad, rather than to an iPhone + projector as
we had in the past.  As usual, this was a crowd favorite.

{% img {static}../images/eyu-2017/eyu2017_baroclinic.jpg 600 Baroclinic instability on the DIYnamics table generated at EYU %}

_Baroclinic instability generated on the DIYnamics table using a
frozen can of tomato paste as the cold source at the center.  We were
happily shocked when this worked first try, all while we were getting
setup for the rest of the event!  Huge thanks to Henry Gonzalez for
making the acryllic sidewall that enabled the fluid to span the
table's full width._

Finally, in addition to the baroclinic instability demonstration on
the big tank, we managed to get it working for the first time on the
smaller DIYnamics table!  These eddies need a sufficiently large tank
in order to grow (specifically, the tank radius must be appreciably
larger than the ["Rossby radius of
deformation"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rossby_radius_of_deformation),
which determines the size of the eddies), and that extra space was
enabled by an acryllic sidewall that Jon installed on one of the
tables with the help of Henry Gonzalez of the UCLA Dept. of Earth,
Planetary, and Space Sciences.  Instead of a paint bucket filled with
ice, we used a frozen can of tomato paste, which also allowed for more
room for the eddies to grow.  We're really excited to try this one
again and ultimately create a lesson plan and videos for it!

Special thanks to returning volunteer Chloe Wicker, first time
volunteer Tersi Arias-Young, the EYU organizers, and most of all the
great kids and parents who came to our booth.  We're already looking
forward to EYU 2018!
