Title: El Marino Language School Science Fair
Date: 2018-04-27
Category: events
Tags: outreach, K-8, baroclinic instability
Slug: el-marino-science-fair
Authors: Spencer Hill
Summary: The DIYnamics team taught basics of rotating fluids using our beloved tables, frozen cans of tomato paste, inflatable globes, and LEGO Batmen at a really cool science fair.
---

{% img {static}../images/el-marino-2018/el-marino-sean.jpg 600 Sean leading a demo %}

_Sean leads a demonstration of "baroclinic instability" (a.k.a. the
combination of a strong temperature contrast and rotation that
generates storms on Earth) to El Marino students and parents.  They're
so focused!  We're now using a LEGO Power Functions remote control to
reduce the rotation rate for this demonstration, which makes these
eddies larger and therefore more engaging.  Even with the bigger
eddies, we were also able to shrink the tank compared to previous
attempts, which allows for a little more breathing room._

On April 27, 2018, Ashna, Sean, and Spencer of the DIYnamics team
performed hands-on demonstrations for dozens of kids at the 23rd
annual science fair of the [El Marino Language
School](https://elmarino.ccusd.org/), a foreign language-focused
elementary school in the Culver City Unified School District, in
Culver City, CA.  In a cool twist on the traditional elementary
school-level science fair, El Marino's fair featured science posters
and demonstrations both from their own students and from multiple
science groups at UCLA.  So the students got to show off their awesome
science and simultaneously learn about the just-as-awesome science
conducted at the university level.  And they even fed us dinner!
Naturally, this was an event that DIYnamics wasn't going to miss!

{% img {static}../images/el-marino-2018/el-marino-ashna.jpg 600 Ashna leading a demo %}

_Our newest DIYnamicist, Ashna, with two excited young El Marino
students eager to drop dye into our tanks.  But before they do so,
Ashna makes sure that they make a hypothesis about what they will see
in each tank.  Then, once the dye has been injected, she asks them to
describe what they are seeing, to decide if their hypothesis was
right, and then ultimately link the results back to the underlying
science we're trying to teach.  This gets participants engaged in
active learning throughout the demonstration._

We came equipped with a handful of our DIYnamics rotating table
platforms, our handy globe, and some LEGO Batman figurines to teach
the students and parents who came by about how Earth's rotation and
temperature contrasts combine to generate the weather patterns that we
know and (sometimes) love.

{% img {static}../images/el-marino-2018/el-marino-spencer-sean.jpg 600 Spencer and Sean leading a demo %}

_Spencer using an inflatable globe with a LEGO figurine (LEGO Batman,
to be specific) taped onto the north pole to make the connection with
students between the real world and the tanks on the table.  The
DIYnamics table farthest back in this image has another LEGO Batman
taped at its center, sitting on top of a polar stereographic map
(a.k.a. a map centered on the North Pole).  Spencer spins the globe
showing that Batman spins with it, and at the same time Sean spins the
table showing that Batman spins the exact same way there!  We've found
this really helps students make the otherwise difficult connection
between tanks of water and the real world._

The parents were a great bunch too!  One father told us that he is a
pilot, and that our explanation of weather systems using the DIYnamics
was the best one he's ever heard!  Pilots really need to know the
weather to fy safely, so that's no small compliment (if we may say
so).

{% img {static}../images/el-marino-2018/el-marino-bci-closeup.jpg 600 El Marino students getting a closeup look at baroclinic instability %}

_El Marino students eagerly awaiting the onset of "storms" driven by
the frozen can of tomato paste in the center of the table.  Initially,
all of the blue dye was injected next to the can and all of the red
dye outside of it.  But you can see that the blue dye has moved
outward in places, while the red dye has moved in toward the can.
(Don't be alarmed by the red patch on the hand pointing down at the
tank...one downside of using red dye is that when it gets on hand it
looks like blood!  No DIYnamicists (or students or parents) were
harmed in the making of this demonstration.)_

Special thanks to Erika M. von Euw of UCLA and the El Marino Language
School PTA for organizing, the many student and parent volunteers at
the event, and most of all the great kids and parents who came to our
table.  We're crossing our fingers that we get a repeat invitation for
next year's fair!
