Title: DIYnamics tables used in an undergraduate+graduate level course
Date: 2018-04-26
Category: courses
Tags: colleges, undergraduate, graduate, curriculum
Slug: ucla-epss-class
Authors: Spencer Hill
Summary: DIYnamics has now officially been implemented into undergraduate and graduate teaching, as part of a "lab day" in a UCLA course.

{% img {filename}../images/jmitch-course-tables2018.jpg 600 DIYnamics tables after the demo, with students and Prof. Mitchell at the next station %}

_Students in the background at one of Prof. Mitchell's demonstration
stations.  They had just finished at the DIYnamics station, where we
used our simple tables to teach some of the basic properties of
rotating fluids.  Spencer can't multi-task well enough to have gotten
a picture of the students while they were at our station, but they
really were just there, we swear!_

On April 26, 2018, DIYnamics marked a major milestone by being
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate-level curricula.
Prof. Jonathan Mitchell of the UCLA Department of Earth, Planetary,
and Space Sciences and Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences
(that's a mouthful!) invited us to use the DIYnamics materials as part
of a "lab demos" day in his course to teach some basic principles of
rotating fluids.

With only one of us (Spencer) there, it was difficult to get pictures
of the students at the DIYnamics station in the moment.  So the
picture above showing the aftermath --- with dye in both the rotating
and non-rotating tables, and the students moved on to the next station
--- will have to suffice.

This shows that the DIYnamics materials can be effective teaching
tools from the elementary school to graduate levels!  Of course, the
level of complexity of the accompanying explanations has to be
tailored to the audience: for early elementary school students, we're
content with the students recognizing that things are different when
you rotate or not, whereas at the university level we're connecting
the demonstations to concepts like the Coriolis parameter, solid body
rotation, spinup times, the Rossby number, and baroclinic instability.
But the physical demonstrations we perform are essentially identical
across these levels!

Big thanks to Prof. Mitchell for allowing us to take part in his
class, Alex Gonzalez of UCLA and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory for his
assistance with the DIYnamics station, Henry Gonzalez, Emily Hawkins,
and Helen Parish of the EPSS department for their work on the awesome
stably stratified convection station, and to all of the students for
indulging us.

## More DIYnamics at the university level

Prof. Mitchell's class was a great way to inaugurate DIYnamics' use at
the college teaching level, and we're excited for him to (hopefully!)
have us back later in the quarter to help him teach "baroclinic
instability"...they haven't gotten that far in the lectures yet.  But
our expansion into the university level isn't stopping there!

{% img {filename}../images/angel-video-bci-snapshot.png 600 Snapshot of a video taken by Angel Adames using his DIYnamics table %}

_Snapshot from the video that Prof. Adames posted to his Facebook page
using the DIYnamics table to (kind of) demonstrate baroclinic
instability.  Thanks for trying us out, Prof. Adames!  We'll help you
work out the kinks of getting that demonstration working properly.
Looks awesome!_

[Prof. Andrew Stewart](https://dept.atmos.ucla.edu/stewart) of the
UCLA AOS Department and [Prof. √Ångel
Adames](http://clasp.engin.umich.edu/people/afadames) of the
University of Michigan Department of Climate and Space Science have
both purchased and successfully built their own DIYnamics tables and
intend to use them in courses they teach, also at the university
level.  Thanks both for giving us a try!  We're eager to see how their
DIYnamics-based teaching pans out.

As much as we DIYnamics team members love putting on demonstrations
ourselves, there are only so many of us, compared to millions of
students around the world that could learn from these materials.
That's why we always try to leave behind a complete DIYnamics rotating
table kit behind at the schools we visit.  And that's why efforts like
these by other teachers and professors to use our materials themselves
are the most important thing moving forward!
