Title: Field Report: Teaching with DIYnamics at Iowa State University
Date: 2019-08-27
Category: Field Reports
Tags: field-reports guest-author university teaching
Slug: iowa-state-2019
Authors: Alex Gonzalez
Summary: Professor Alex Gonzalez at Iowa State University shares how he has used DIYnamics in his classroom.
---

_[Note from Spencer: This post is part of our ongoing [Field
Reports]({category}Field Reports) series, where DIYnamics users across
the country (and one day, the world) share how they've used the
DIYnamics kit and materials in their local communities.]_

{% youtube ZdFOFROqVS0 640 480 %}

_Video footage by Prof. Gonzalez of a beautiful demonstration of Ekman
transport.  Near solid boundaries, such as near Earth's surface for
the atmosphere, the ocean floor, and the bottom of the tank ifor the
DIYnamics table, friction with the solid surface changes how the fluid
flows compared to far away from the surface, where friction can be
mostly ignored._

I purchased and built a DIYnamics rotating tank and used it in my
undergraduate Dynamics I course at Iowa State University (ISU) during
the 2019 spring semester.  Six experiments were conducted throughout
the semester: 1) Solid body rotation, 2) Dye stirring/Rossby number,
3) Baroclinic eddies, 4) Taylor Proudman effect, 5) Fronts, and 6)
Ekman layers.  I led the first experiment on solid body rotation while
the other five experiments were co-led by one to three students in the
class.  The experiments were quite successful overall and will
continue to be used in dynamics and other courses at ISU.

Some highlights, including photos and videos, are shown below. Some
issues to address for future improvement are also discussed. Any
feedback would be greatly appreciated!

{% img {static}../images/iowa-state-2019/iowa-state-1.jpg 600 %}

_Students awaiting (and one performing) the solid-body rotation
demonstration on the DIYnamics table._

Baroclinic eddies (no photos): The baroclinic eddies experiment was
not as successful as the others due to the lack of a flat bottom on
the rotating tank and possibly the use of a too small of a cold can at
the center.  Anyone else have similar problems?

{% img {static}../images/iowa-state-2019/iowa-state-2.png 600  %}

_Side view of the solid-body rotation demonstration.  Notice the dye
sinking basically straight down to the bottom, with little horizontal
movement.  That means there's no relative fluid flow: all of the water
is rotating at the same rate as the tank.  As if it were a "solid
body".  Get it?_

Lack of flat bottom: One student constructed a flat bottom for one of
the two tanks that worked quite well for the experiments but over the
semester the bottom absorbed water so a more solid flat bottom is
planned to be constructed in the future.  Any ideas out there for how
to do this affordably?

{% img {static}../images/iowa-state-2019/iowa-state-3.jpg 600  %}

_An overhead photo of a Taylor column demonstration.  A thin metal
puck is placed at the bottom of the tank, and after solid-body
rotation is reached, dye is injected and the rotation rate is
decreased.  This causes the dye to move toward the puck.  But, rather
than just going over it, the dye gets deflected around --- as if the
puck extended all the way to the surface._

Fronts (aka the "slumping dye cylinder"): The fronts experiment was
the most difficult experiment to execute due to the fact that the
salty dyed water in the center kept leaking slightly into the exterior
fresh clear water.  We tried several methods and the one that worked
best was to use A LOT of petroleum jelly to seal the bottom and
prevent leaking (following MITâ€™s weather in a tank) but it still
leaked.  Additionally, the can was removed possibly too abruptly and
induced extra momentum.  Any suggestions for how to get a better seal?
