Title: BAM(S)!  New peer-reviewed paper on DIYnamics
Date: 2019-03-12
Category: announcements
Tags: paper
Slug: bams-paper
Authors: Spencer Hill
Summary: A paper summarizing the DIYnamics project was recently published by the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society.
---

{% img {static}../images/bams-paper/bams-title-snippet.png 600 Snippet from the title page of our BAMS paper %}

_A snippet from the title page of our BAMS paper._

We DIYnamicists are thrilled to share that the
[Bulletin](https://www.ametsoc.org/index.cfm/ams/publications/bulletin-of-the-american-meteorological-society-bams/)
of the [American Meteorological
Society](https://www.ametsoc.org/index.cfm/ams/) --- BAMS as its more
commonly known --- a prestigious journal that publishes peer-reviewed
papers on the latest advances in meteorology, climate science, and
weather/climate science education, recently published an [article all
about
DIYnamics](https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/BAMS-D-17-0215.1).
It was written by several of us in the first half of 2018 and accepted
for publication a few months later, and was then published as part of
BAMS' December 2018 issue.  (Academic publishing does not operate at
lightning speed!)

Titled "Affordable rotating fluid demonstrations for geoscience
education: The _DIYnamics_ project", it provides an overarching
summary of the whole endeavor: why rotating tanks are valuable
teaching tools, why there's a need for cheaper devices and easy-to-use
teaching materials, how our platform works, past outreach events that
we've done (see many other blog posts for details on those), and so
on.  As academic journals go, BAMS is very not stuffy, and we
deliberately wrote the article so that anybody could read it and
understand it...since that's basically the whole point of DIYnamics
anyways!

This was a major honor for us, and we sincerely hope that more and
more people will learn about DIYnamics and take it seriously thanks to
this.  In fact, already at least one community college professor
emailed me who plans to use it in one of his classrooms.  Huge thanks
go to the BAMS editors, publishing staff, the two peer reviewers who
provided really valuable suggestions (one was anonymous, the other was
[Prof. Paul Williams](http://www.met.reading.ac.uk/~williams/) of the
University of Reading), and to everybody else along the way who has
made this possible.
