Title: Vortices on our LEGO table and "The Whale2" table at Roscomare Elementary and David Geffen Academy
Date: 2019-09-16
Category: events
Tags: K-8, polar-vortex, whale2
Slug: geffen-roscomare-2019
Authors: Jon Aurnou
Summary: Core DIYnamicist Jon Aurnou shares how he and his group members taught K-8 students about vortices, including the polar vortex, using the standard LEGO-based DIYnamics table and the large-and-in-charge Whale Table.
---

{% youtube 821B56GS7zE 640 480 %}

_Swirling polar flows reach down to lower latitudes in our
demonstration made on the 1 meter diameter Whale Table._

# Making Crazy Vortices at Roscomare Elementary School

Prof. Aurnou took two DIYnamics Lego Tables to Career Day at Roscomare
Elementary School on April 12, 2019.  After discussing what makes
planets and their atmospheres so interesting in the classroom (How
about jets & vortices!), the entire class ventured outside and did
experiments on how food coloring moves around differently in standing
tanks of water compared to rotating ones.  We discussed what aspects
of the different flow patterns looks more or less like what we see in
planetary atmospheres.  Lastly, one student dumped A LOT of green food
coloring into one tank and pointed out that there wasn’t anything to
see anymore.  Which is really an important experiment to carry out.

{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-2019-1.jpg 600 %}

_Students at Roscomare ask Jon questions about fluid flows.  Although
one of them, Ethan (standing), has heard this stuff before...Jon is
his dad!_

# Attack of the Polar Vortex!!! at David Geffen Academy

On April 27, 2019, members of the [SpinLab
group](http://spinlab.epss.ucla.edu/) —-- Jewel Abbate, Jon Aurnou, AJ
Chlarson, Henry Gonzalez, Emily Hawkins, Taylor Lonner and Yufan Xu
--- figured out how to transport one Lego Table (easy) and our new 40"
diameter prototype table, code-named Whale2 (not as easy!), over to
the Geffen Academy on the southern tip of UCLA’s campus.  The next
day, Prof. Aurnou lead three 50-minute classes with essential pit crew
support from Jewel, Emily, Henry and Yufan.  This demo-based
presentation, entitled “Attack of the Polar Vortex!!!”, was given to a
mix of 6th - 8th graders as part of Geffen Academy’s 2019 UCLA Day.
After 5 minutes of slides showing how wintertime polar flows can reach
down and visit the mid-latitudes, the class ran a set of experiments
on the Lego Table to watch how a patch of dense creamer in a rotating
tank of water become unstable, and shreds itself into smaller
structures.

{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-2019-3.jpg 600  %}

_Jon with two happy students.  Once again, Ethan Aurnou, this time
with his sister Abby.  Pretty cool to learn science through fun
demonstrations AND have your dad visit you at school!_

Then a related experiment was carried out on The Whale2, filled
with about 5 cm of water and rotating at about 8 revolutions per
minute.  Here a frozen ice-filled paint can was placed at the center
of the tank to generate cold, dense polar “air masses” which we
demarcated with blue food coloring.  We marked the warmer water near
the outside of the tank with red food coloring, and then sat back and
watched our simulated polar vortex become unstable and “attack”
Chicago and the like.  The students asked many excellent questions and
made a number of observations.  For instance, it was noted that the
processes on the smaller Lego Table appeared to mimic those on the
much larger Whale, and that this suggested that the processes we see
in our demonstrations might then scale up to larger systems like the
atmosphere.  Yes (!), that is exactly the idea.
