Title: Field Report: DIYnamics tables in undergraduate teaching at Kiel University in Germany
Date: 2020-03-04
Category: Field Reports
Tags: field-reports, guest-author, teaching, international
Slug: mirjam-2020
Authors: Mirjam Glessmer
Summary: Mirjam Glessmer describes how she and colleagues at Kiel University in Germany are using the DIYnamics tables in innovative ways in their classrooms.
---

_[Note from Spencer: This post is part of our ongoing [Field
Reports]({category}Field Reports) series, where DIYnamics users across
the country --- and in this case, the world(!) --- share how they've
used the DIYnamics kit and materials in their local communities.]_

{% img {static}../images/mirjam-2020/mirjam-2020_01.jpg 600 %}

_Our group of students coming together at one tank to discuss
observations. Note that in the background a square tank is sitting on
a different rotating table, being spun up for the Rossby wave
experiment described below._

When we came across the [DIYnamics
article](https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/BAMS-D-17-0215.1)
right after its publication,
[Torge](https://www.geomar.de/en/staff/fb1/od/tomartin/) and I
([Mirjam](https://mirjamglessmer.com/)) were very excited about the
endless possibilities we saw opening up with an affordable tool like
the DIYnamics rotating table. We applied for, and were granted, money
for an “innovative teaching” project by [Kiel
University](https://www.uni-kiel.de/en/)’s
[PerLe](https://www.perle.uni-kiel.de/en) and built four DIYnamics
rotating tables (five if you count the one I built for personal use
;-)), which we’ve been working with for about a year now. Since we are
using them in a slightly different context than we’ve seen described
before, and also have modified and added some of the experiments, I
thought I’d report on it here. If you have any comments or suggestions
for us, please do get in touch!


# DIYnamics tables in undergraduate education

In contrast to using the DIYnamics rotating tables mainly for outreach
purposes which is the most common application I am aware of, we are
using them as part of a regular Bachelor-level class on "ocean and
atmosphere dynamics" at Geomar, Germany. I have gained a lot of
experience using a rotating table in undergraduate education at GFI,
Norway, but there we only had one – much bigger – table available. Now
we have four that can be used simultaneously! This is great for so
many reasons:


## Time efficiency for the instructor

With only one rotating table available, the typical setup I have used
was to have small groups of students come in at different times over
the course of a week or so, to do that week’s experiment with me. But
that meant that I would spend a lot of time in the lab, and a large
part of that time would be spent on waiting for the water on the
rotating table to have spun up into solid body rotation, as well as
prep time or cleaning, drying, putting away time.

Of course, wait times can easily be used for discussions of the
upcoming experiment, of the concept of a “spun up” body of water, of
how to judge whether or not a body of water is spun up or not, and
many other things. But those are things that don’t necessarily have to
be discussed in a setting of one instructor per each small student
group, they could just as well be discussed in student groups and then
in a larger plenum.


## Exchange between student groups

In the setup with one table and student groups coming in one after the
other, students would then write lab reports, submit them, and come
back for the next experiment. While I am sure there was some exchange
between student groups happening (which we could sometimes see from
eerily similar ways of expressing things between groups, or errors
propagating through several groups’ reports), that wasn’t an
instructional design choice.

Now, however, when we have student groups working on the same
experiment at the same time in the same room, it is very easy to have
discussions both within individual groups and then across
groups. There are many instructional methods to choose from that
facilitate that kind of exchange, for example “think, pair, share”,
where students first think about a question individually, then pair up
with a partner (or the group at their tank) to discuss, and then
results are shared with and discussed in the whole class.

## Seeing many implementations of the same experiment

One reason why these discussions are especially fruitful if done in
connection with simultaneously run tank experiments is that, even if
all student groups get the exact same instructions, two
implementations of the same experiment do not ever look the
same. There is always something that’s different. Maybe one tank is
spun up less than the others, or a bit wobbly, because someone bumped
into the table mid-spinup. Or the dye that is used as flow tracer has
a different density for one group (less diluted? Different
temperature?) and thus behaves differently. Or dye is put in a
different spot in the tank and thus shows different features of the
flow field. There are so many tiny things that can and will be
different from experiment to experiment, and it’s a great learning
experience to see an ensemble of different implementations and discuss
what change in boundary conditions made results look different rather
than just seeing one implementation and wrongly assuming that this is
the one and only way this experiment always turns out.

## Seeing many different experiments at the same time

And then, there is of course the opportunity to have different student
groups work on different experiments simultaneously, which cuts down
on total prep and spin-up time and enables students to see a larger
variety of experiments. It also opens up the possibility that students
pick what experiment they want to work on – either new ones or
repeating older ones that they would like to take better pictures of
or modify something in the boundary conditions. This seems to be very
motivating!


# Why we are using higher-walled tanks

{% img {static}../images/mirjam-2020/mirjam-2020_02.jpg 600 %}

_Students working with an experiment on the Ekman bottom boundary
layer – one of the experiments that really benefit from a larger water
depth because this allows for observations of the development of the
boundary layer over time._

In contrast to the tanks we’ve seen used on the DIYnamics rotating
tables before, we chose to invest in some high-walled tanks.

An interesting feature of rotating fluid dynamics is that the flow
becomes 2D, so technically having a shallow layer of water is
completely sufficient to give a good representation of those
flows. And if we look at the aspect ratios of the oceans, they are in
fact extremely shallow compared to their horizontal extent. But it’s
easy to see a 2D flow in a shallow tank and assume that it’s 2D
because of the shape of the tank, not because of the flow itself. So
having an exaggerated third (depth) dimension that can be easily
observed by looking into the tank from the side actually helps drive
home the point that there is “nothing to see” on that dimension
because the flow really is as 2D as theory told us it would be.

But then there are of course the cases where the flow isn’t 2D, and
then a higher-walled tank is really convenient. For some experiments
where there are exciting things to discover by looking into the tank
from the side, check out [this blog
post](https://mirjamglessmer.com/2020/01/31/giving-it-a-side-eye-why-we-use-high-walled-tanks-on-our-rotating-table-flumefriday/)
over on my blog.


# Experiment on planetary Rossby waves

One of the first experiments we tried on our DIYnamics rotating table
was a “planetary Rossby wave” experiment. We hadn’t bought our
cylindrical tanks yet (read more about those below), so using a clear
plastic storage box was very convenient. Btw, this is one of the
experiments where looking into the tank from the side gives a lot of
interesting insights!

{% img {static}../images/mirjam-2020/mirjam-2020_03.jpg 600 %}

_Planetary Rossby waves in a square tank with a sloping bottom._

For the planetary Rossby wave experiment, we need a sloping bottom
(easiest done in a rectangular tank, but we’ve also run the same
experiment on a cone-shaped insert in a cylindrical tank) and a dyed
ice cube. When the tank is in solid body rotation, a dyed ice cube is
inserted in the shallow “eastern” corner of the tank (make sure it is
sitting far enough from the edge of the tank so it can turn around its
own axis unobstructed). For more details see [this blog
post](https://mirjamglessmer.com/2019/09/13/planetary-rossby-waves-on-beta-plane-a-super-easy-tank-experiment/),
but in a nutshell: The cold melt water sinks, setting up a column of
spinning water that sheds spinning eddies at regular intervals. Eddies
and ice cube propagate westwards. This is a really easy and fool-proof
experiment, and it looks beautiful!


# Presenting the DIYnamics tanks at an institute colloquium

In January, Torge and I gave a seminar presentation titled “you should
really play more often! Using tank experiments in teaching” at our
institute’s colloquium. In the abstract, we announced that we would
give a brief overview over our project and then give people the
opportunity to play – which we did. We had been expecting that maybe a
handful of our loyal friends would stick around after the presentation
to look at the tanks, but we were very surprised and excited to see
that pretty much everybody in the audience wanted to stay. We had set
up the four rotating tables with four different experiments and a
student presenting at each in the back of the room, and we ended up
running all the experiments repeatedly, until we were kicked out of
the room because the next lecture was about to start. It was really
motivating to see how everyone – students, PhD students, postdocs,
staff, professors – got really excited and wanted to learn more about
the tank experiments, discuss observations, modify and
experiment. This goes to show that an affordable rotating table is an
amazing tool at every level of education: There is always more to
discover!

{% img {static}../images/mirjam-2020/mirjam-2020_04.jpg 600 %}

_A snapshot of the audience of our seminar presentation interacting
with the tanks and each other. We were running four experiments
simultaneously._

# Follow our experiences

If you want to follow our experiences with the DIYnamics rotating
tables, there are several options for you:

Torge and I have recently launched the “Teaching Ocean Science” blog
at
[https://www.oceanblogs.org/teachingoceanscience/](https://www.oceanblogs.org/teachingoceanscience/),
which is a joint effort of ourselves and other instructors, describing
fun hands-on stuff they do in their teaching, and students, who write
course assignments on what they are currently learning for the blog.

Additionally, all the outgoing links in my guest post above are to
posts on my own blog, “Adventures in Teaching and Oceanography”, at
[https://mirjamglessmer.com/blog](https://mirjamglessmer.com/blog). I
use that blog as my own archive and document every new thing I try on
there, so you might want to sign up for email alerts or follow via my
Twitter [@meermini](https://twitter.com/meermini).

In addition to writing about the DIYnamics rotating tables and what we
are up to with those (and you can be sure that if I played with a
tank, you will read it on that blog right away ;-)), I write a lot
about
[#KitchenOceanography](https://mirjamglessmer.com/2019/07/09/whats-kitchenoceanography-all-about/)
(which are very easy hands-on experiments on ocean and climate topics
that you can do with household items) and
[#WaveWatching](https://mirjamglessmer.com/wave-watching/) (observing
ocean physics everywhere, all the time). I also write about science
communication issues.

Please feel free to check out those blogs and as I wrote in the
beginning: Please get in touch if you have any comments or suggestions
for us. I am always happy to chat!

(_This project has been funded by the PerLe fund for innovative teaching
through resources from the Federal Ministry of Education and Research,
grant number: 01LP17068. The responsibility for the content of this
publication lies with the authors._)
