Title: Vortices on our LEGO table and "The Whale" table at Roscomare Elementary and David Geffen Academy
Date: 2019-09-01
Category: events
Tags: K-8 polar-vortex whale-table
Slug: geffen-roscomare-2019
Authors: Jon Aurnou
Summary: Core DIYnamicist Jon Aurnou shares how he and his group members taught K-8 students about vortices, including the polar vortex, using the standard LEGO-based DIYnamics table and the large-and-in-charge Whale Table.
---

{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-1.jpg 600 %}

_abc_

# Making Crazy Vortices at Roscomare Elementary School

Prof. Aurnou took two Lego Tables to Career Day at Roscomare
Elementary School on April 12, 2019.  After discussing what makes
planets and their atmospheres so interesting in the classroom (How
about jets & vortices!), the entire class ventured outside and did
experiments on how food coloring moves around different in standing
tanks of water in comparison to rotating ones.  We discussed what
aspects of the different flow patterns looks more or less like what we
see in planetary atmospheres.  Lastly, one student dumped A LOT of
green food coloring into one tank and pointed out that there wasn’t
anything to see anymore.  Which is really an important experiment to
carry out.

Pics: 1) In class and 2) With Roscomare students post-experimentation.

# Attack of the Polar Vortex!!! at David Geffen Academy

On April 27, 2019, members of the [SpinLab
group](http://spinlab.epss.ucla.edu/) —-- Jewel Abbate, Jon Aurnou, AJ
Chlarson, Henry Gonzalez, Emily Hawkins, Taylor Lonner and Yufan Xu
--- figured out how to transport one Lego Table (easy) and our new
~40” diameter Whale Table (not as easy!) over to the Geffen Academy on
the southern tip of UCLA’s campus.  The next day, Prof. Aurnou lead
three 50-minute classes with essential pit crew support from Jewel,
Emily, Henry and Yufan.  This demo-based presentation, entitled
“Attack of the Polar Vortex!!!”, was given to a mix of 6th - 8th
graders as part of Geffen Academy’s 2019 UCLA Day.  After 5 minutes of
slides showing how wintertime polar flows can reach down and visit the
mid-latitudes, the class ran a set of experiments on the Lego Table to
watch how a patch of dense creamer in a rotating tank of water become
unstable, and shreds itself into smaller structures.

Then a related experiment was carried out on The Whale Table, filled
with about 5 cm of water and rotating at about 8 revolutions per
minute.  Here a frozen ice-filled paint can was placed at the center
of the tank to generate cold, dense polar “air masses” which we
demarcated with blue food coloring.  We marked the warmer water near
the outside of the tank with red food coloring, and then sat back and
watched our simulated polar vortex become unstable and “attack”
Chicago and the like.  The students asked many excellent questions and
made a number of observations.  For instance, it was noted that the
processes on the smaller Lego Table appeared to mimic those on the
much larger Whale, and that this suggested that the processes we see
in our demonstrations might then scale up to larger systems like the
atmosphere.  Yes (!), that is exactly the idea.

{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-2.png 600  %}

_Prof. Aurnou and Geffen Academy students analyze rotating flows on
the Lego Table._


{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-3.jpg 600  %}

_abc_

{% img {static}../images/geffen-roscomare-2019/geffen-roscomare-0.mov 600  %}

_Swirling polar flows reach down to lower latitudes in our much larger
demonstration made on the 1 meter diameter Whale Table._
