Title: Links to other cool resources
Slug: links

{% img {filename}../images/phytoplankton_bloom.jpg 800 A phytoplankton bloom highlighting the swirling, eddying nature of our oceans %}

There are a ton of other great resources for geoscience education from
the elementary through university education levels.  Here we gather
together a few of our favorites, organized into categories.

# Other rotating tank resources

## [UCLA SPINLab](http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/)

The Simulated Planetary INteriors Laboratory at UCLA studies the fluid
dynamics of Earth and other planets, including magnetohydrodynamics.
They use actual physical experiments cutting edge tank and sensor
technologies.  They also have a great YouTube channel with many
enjoyable and [educational
videos](https://www.youtube.com/user/spinlabucla).  They also
regularly participate in numerous public outreach events (presentation
slides can be found
[here](http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Aurnou-TurntableRecipes-EYU2011.pdf)).

## [MIT "Weather in a Tank" project](http://weathertank.mit.edu/)

"Weather in a Tank" details how to conduct rotating fluid experiments
to teach into atmospheric and oceanic processes.  A video introduction
to the project can be found [here](https://youtu.be/uWdKVpQ94Ns).
Mostly intended for instructors at the upper-division undergraduate or
early graduate levels.

## [Weather in a Tank's "Virtual Lab"](http://lab.rotating.co)

Interactive online teaching module that combines animations, video,
theory, and more for a truly unique educational experience.

## [Marshall and Plumb textbook](http://marshallplumb.mit.edu/)

*Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Dynamics* by Marshall and Plumb teaches
the fundamentals of atmospheric and oceanic circulation, with rotating
fluid tank demonstrations integrated into every chapter.  The book's
website provides further information about how to conduct the
experiments and use them as teaching tools.  Mostly intended for
students and professors at the upper-division undergraduate or early
graduate levels.

# Online games that teach atmosphere, ocean, and climate concepts

## [Interactive Earth](https://ian-r-rose.github.io/interactive_earth/index.html)

Awesome interactive web-based demonstration of convection in Earth's
mantle.

## [Earth](https://earth.nullschool.net/)

Amazing interactive visualizer of weather and oceanographic data, both
as they are behaving right now and in the past, up to a few years
before present.

## [UCAR Center for Science Education games portal](https://scied.ucar.edu/games)

## [EarthGames](https://earthgames.org/)
