Title: Team
Slug: people

The DIYnamics team is composed of students, professors, and
scientists, originally at UCLA but now spanning numerous institutions
across America.

## Core Team

{% img {static}../images/people/Spencer.png 200 Spencer Hill %}

**Spencer Hill** (Postdoc, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia
University)<br>Along with Juan Lora, Spencer is co-leading the overall
DIYnamics project.  He loves using rotating tanks to teach core
science concepts, and his dream is to put a DIYnamics rotating tank
kit in every science classroom in the country. [Link to Spencer's
webpage](http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~shill)

{% img {static}../images/people/Lora.jpg 200 Juan Lora %}

**Juan Lora** (Assistant Professor, Yale University, Department of
Geology and Geophysics)<br>Along with Spencer Hill, Juan is co-leading
the overall DIYnamics project. He is interested in using science demos
to illustrate abstract physical phenomena in tangible and exciting
ways, and to bring the joy of science to non-scientists and students
of all backgrounds (and maybe help inspire a few future
scientists). [Link to Juan's
webpage](https://earth.yale.edu/people/juan-lora)

{% img {static}../images/people/Aurnou.jpg 200 Jonathan Aurnou %}

**Jonathan Aurnou** (Professor, UCLA Dept. of Earth, Planetary, and
Space Sciences)<br>Jonathan considers few things as satisfying as
developing inexpensive, portable rotating tables for teaching core
geoscience topics.  Thus, he is so pleased to be a part of the
DIYnamics project. [Link to Jon's
webpage](http://epss.ucla.edu/people/faculty/543/)

{% img {static}../images/people/Norris.jpeg 200 Norris Khoo %}

**Norris Khoo** (Undergraduate, UCLA Dept. of Earth, Planetary, and
Space Sciences)<br>Norris designed the DIY Rotating Tank and wrote its
PDF instructions. He created the outreach project website and
instructional videos with the help of Spencer Hill.

{% img {static}../images/people/jonathan-mitchell.png 200 Jonathan Mitchell %}

**Jonathan Mitchell** (Associate Professor, UCLA Dept. of Earth, Planetary,
and Space Sciences and Dept. of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences)<br>Jonathan has been using rotating tanks for years and
helped Juan and Sean get started with them.  He also has incorporated
the DIYnamics tables into multiple classes he has taught, both at the
undergraduate and graduate levels.  [Link to
Jonathan's webpage](http://www2.ess.ucla.edu/~mitch/Home.html)

## Outreach Event Volunteers

{% img {static}../images/people/Ashley.png 200 Ashley Shoenfeld %}

**Ashley Shoenfeld** (Graduate student, UCLA Dept. of Earth, Planetary, and
Space Sciences)<br>Ashley is currently studying the ice moons of
Jupiter and Saturn, and is a volunteer for the DIYnamics project. She
believes outreach is one of the most important aspects of being a
scientist, and genuinely loves teaching. She is passionate about
science and hope she can impart that passion onto others.

{% img {static}../images/people/chloe-whicker.jpg 200 Chloe Whicker %} **Chloe Whicker**

**Chloe Whicker** (Undergraduate, UCLA Institute for the Environment
and Sustainability)<br>Chloe is a UCLA undergraduate majoring in
environmental science with a concentration in atmospheric and oceanic
science.  She is interested in studying climate science and is
passionate about increasing access to and retention in STEM fields
through interactive and hands on experiences.

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Ashna Aggarwal %} **Ashna Aggarwal**

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Alex Arnold %} **Alex Arnold**

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Ellen Hoppe %} **Ellen Hoppe**

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Helen Parish %} **Helen Parish**

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Katie Tuite %} **Katie Tuite**

## Alumni

{% img {static}../images/people/Sean.png 200 Sean Faulk %}

**Sean Faulk** (Student, UCLA Medical school)<br>Sean helped write the
lab instructions and organize the first outreach trips for the
DIYnamics project.  As a Ph.D. student in the UCLA Dept. of Earth,
Planetary, and Space Sciences, he studied climates on other planets
and moons, most of all Saturn's moon Titan.  And he loved going out to
schools to play with rotating tanks and help students learn about
planetary atmospheres!  After finishing his Ph.D. in 2018, Dr. Faulk
made the leap from outer space to human bodies, as he is now pursuing
his M.D. as a medical student at the UCLA Medical School.

{% img {static}../images/people/Person.jpg 200 Raul Reyes %}

**Raul Reyes** (Undergraduate, UCLA Dept. of Earth, Planetary, and
Space Sciences)<br>Raul created the [baroclinic
eddies](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2nACitkIqNs) video under
Juan's guidance.

## Origin story

The idea for DIYnamics came from Jon Aurnou's Simulated Planetary
INteriors Lab (a.k.a. Spinlab), in the UCLA Department of Earth,
Planetary, and Space Sciences.  Spinlab has been conducting outreach
using rotating tanks for years, but Jon was yearning for a cheap,
portable version of the equipment that people without the equipment
(and budget) of his highly specialized lab could easily attain.  There
was (and still is) MIT's excellent Weather in a Tank platform, but
that costs several thousand dollars and requires custom assemply.

Work began in earnest in 2016 within Spinlab, and late in that year
Spencer, Juan, and Sean joined the fold.  But it really took off in
early 2017 when, due to a scheduling snafu, Norris got stuck observing
one of our meetings and --- essentially on the spot --- came up with
the LEGO-based design that was far superior to the wood-based
prototype we were working on up to then.  Within days we had a working
prototype that is, with only a few modest tweaks, the DIYnamics
LEGO-based table.
